THE BEGINNING
PRIEST: O heavenly King, Comforter, the Spirit of truth, who art everywhere present and fillest all things, the Treasury of good things and Giver of life: Come and abide in us, and cleanse us from every stain, and save our souls, O good One.
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will among men. (thrice)
O Lord, thou shalt open my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise. (twice)
O Lord, Lord, open to us the door of Thy mercy.
DEACON: It is time for the Lord to act. Bless, holy master.
PRIEST: Blessed is our God, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
DEACON: Amen. Pray for me, holy master.
PRIEST: The Lord direct thy steps unto every good work.
DEACON: Remember me, holy master.
PRIEST: The Lord God remember thee in his kingdom, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
DEACON: Amen.
The deacon exits the sanctuary and, standing at his place on the solea, says aloud: Bless, master.
The priest kisses the gospel book, lifts and lowers it, making with it the sign of the cross over the antimension and saying:
PRIEST: Blessed is the kingdom of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.

THE LITANY OF PEACE
DEACON: In peace, let us pray to the Lord.
The choir responds Lord, have mercy to each petition.
For the peace from above and the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.
For the peace of the whole world, the good estate of the holy churches of God and the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.
For this holy house and those who with faith, reverence and fear of God enter therein, let us pray to the Lord.
For our father and metropolitan, N., (our bishop, N.,) the honorable presbytery, the diaconate in Christ, all the clergy and the people, let us pray to the Lord.
For our country, its president (or appropriate head of state), civil authorities and armed forces, let us pray to the Lord.
For this city and every city and countryside and the faithful who dwell therein, let us pray to the Lord.
For healthful seasons, abundance of the fruits of the earth and peaceful times, let us pray to the Lord.
For travelers by sea, by land and by air, the sick, the suffering, the captive, and for their salvation, let us pray to the Lord.
For our deliverance from all tribulation, wrath, danger and necessity, let us pray to the Lord.
Help us; save us; have mercy on us; and keep us, O God, by thy grace.
Calling to remembrance our all-holy, immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary, with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and each other and all our life unto Christ our God.
CHOIR: To thee, O Lord.
The priest says the prayer of the first antiphon quietly; only the concluding exclamation is said aloud.
PRIEST: For unto thee are due all glory, honor and worship, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.

THE FIRST ANTIPHON
Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, O Saviour, save us.
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit.
Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, O Saviour, save us.
Both now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.
Through the intercessions of the Theotokos, O Saviour, save us.

THE LITTLE LITANY
DEACON: Again and again, in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
The choir responds Lord, have mercy to each petition.
Help us; save us; have mercy on us; and keep us, O God, by thy grace.
Calling to remembrance our all-holy, immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary, with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and each other and all our life unto Christ our God.
CHOIR: To thee, O Lord.
The priest says the prayer of the second antiphon quietly; only the concluding exclamation is said aloud.
PRIEST: For thine is the might, and thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory, of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.

THE SECOND ANTIPHON
Save us, O Son of God, who art risen from the dead, who sing to thee: Alleluia. (twice)
On weekdays: "...who art wondrous in the saints."
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit.
Save us, O Son of God, who art risen from the dead, who sing to thee: Alleluia.
Both now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.
Only-begotten Son and Word of God, who art immortal, who for our salvation deigned to be incarnate of the holy Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary and without change became man and wast crucified, O Christ our God, and trampled down death by death, who art one of the Holy Trinity, glorified together with the Father and the Holy Spirit: save us.

THE LITTLE LITANY
DEACON: Again and again, in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
The choir responds Lord, have mercy to each petition.
Help us; save us; have mercy on us; and keep us, O God, by thy grace.
Calling to remembrance our all-holy, immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary, with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and each other and all our life unto Christ our God.
CHOIR: To thee, O Lord.
The priest says the prayer of the third antiphon quietly; only the concluding exclamation is said aloud.
PRIEST: For thou art a good God and lovest mankind, and unto thee we ascribe glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.

THE ENTRANCE
While the choir chants the appropriate hymn of the day, the priest and deacon make the little entrance.
{{HYMN_OF_DAY}}
DEACON: Let us pray to the Lord.
PRIEST: O Master, Lord our God, who hast appointed in heaven orders and hosts of angels and archangels for the service of thy glory: Cause that with our entrance there may be an entrance of holy angels serving with us and glorifying thy goodness. For unto thee are due all glory, honor and worship, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
DEACON: Amen.
DEACON: Bless, master, the holy entrance.
PRIEST: Blessed is the entrance of thy holy ones, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
DEACON: Amen.
DEACON: Wisdom. Stand upright.
The clergy, alone or with the choir, chant the appointed eisodikon as they enter the sanctuary.

THE EISODIKON
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ. Save us, O Son of God...
(Sundays) ...who art risen from the dead, who sing unto thee: Alleluia.
(Weekdays) ...who art wondrous in the saints, who sing unto thee: Alleluia.
Then, the choir chants the appointed apolytikia, while the priest says the prayer of the thrice-holy hymn.
{{TROPARIA}}
The priest says the prayer of the thrice-holy hymn quietly; only the concluding exclamation is said aloud.
The clergy then chant the appointed kontakion, the choir chanting the concluding phrase.
{{KONTAKION}}
DEACON: Let us pray to the Lord.
CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
PRIEST: For holy art thou, O our God, and unto thee we ascribe glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever...
DEACON: ...and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.

THE THRICE-HOLY HYMN
Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal: have mercy on us. (thrice)
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.
Holy Immortal: have mercy on us.
DEACON: With strength.
Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal: have mercy on us.
{{THRICE_HOLY_REPLACEMENT}}
DEACON: Command, master.
PRIEST: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.
DEACON: Bless, master, the throne on high.
PRIEST: Blessed art thou on the throne of the glory of thy kingdom, who art enthroned upon the cherubim, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
DEACON: Amen.

THE EPISTLE
DEACON: Let us attend.
READER: (says the prokeimenon of the epistle)
{{PROKEIMENON}}
DEACON: Wisdom.
READER: (says the title of the epistle)
DEACON: Let us attend.
The reader chants the appointed epistle. At the conclusion, the priest blesses him, saying:
{{EPISTLE}}
PRIEST: Peace be to thee that readest.
CHOIR: Alleluia. (thrice)
{{ALLELUIA}}

THE GOSPEL
DEACON: Let us pray to the Lord. Lord, have mercy.
PRIEST: Illumine our hearts, O Master who lovest mankind, with the pure light of thy divine knowledge, and open the eyes of our mind to the understanding of thy gospel teachings; implant in us also the fear of thy blessed commandments that, trampling down all carnal desires, we may enter upon a spiritual manner of living, both thinking and doing such things as are well-pleasing unto thee. For thou art the Illumination of our souls and bodies, O Christ our God, and unto thee we ascribe glory, together with thine unoriginate Father and thine all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.
DEACON: Bless, master, him that proclaimeth the good tidings of the holy, glorious apostle and evangelist N.
PRIEST: May God, through the prayers of the holy, glorious apostle and evangelist N., enable thee to proclaim the good tidings with great power, to the fulfillment of the gospel of his beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ.
DEACON: Amen. Amen. Amen. Let it be to me according to thy word.
DEACON: Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us hear the holy gospel.
PRIEST: Peace be to all.
CHOIR: And to thy spirit.
DEACON: The reading from the holy gospel according to N.
CHOIR: Glory to thee, O Lord. Glory to thee.
DEACON: Let us attend. (and he chants the appointed lection)
{{GOSPEL}}
PRIEST: Peace be to thee that proclaimest the gospel.
CHOIR: Glory to thee, O Lord. Glory to thee.
The priest preaches the homily. He may then offer the prayer for the catechumens aloud if there are any in the parish:

PRAYER FOR THE CATECHUMENS
O Lord our God, who dwellest on high and regardest things below, who hast sent forth as the salvation of the race of men thine only-begotten Son and God, our Lord Jesus Christ: Look down upon thy servants the catechumens, who have bowed their necks before thee; make them worthy in due season of the laver of regeneration, the remission of sins and the robe of incorruption. Unite them to thy holy, catholic and apostolic Church, and number them with thine elect flock, that with us they may glorify thine all-honorable and majestic name, of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.
DEACON: Help us; save us; have mercy on us; and keep us, O God, by thy grace. Wisdom.
PRIEST: That guarded always by thy might we may ascribe glory unto thee, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.

THE CHERUBIC HYMN
Let us, who mystically represent the cherubim and sing the thrice-holy hymn to the life-giving Trinity, now lay aside all earthly care, that we may receive the King of all, invisibly escorted by the angelic hosts. Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia.
The priest quietly says the prayer of the cherubic hymn, then censes the sanctuary. The faithful bow without making the sign of the Cross as the priest censes them.

THE GREAT ENTRANCE
DEACON: All of you, the Lord God remember in his kingdom, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.
PRIEST: Our father and metropolitan, N., (and our bishop, N.,) and all our brotherhood in Christ, the Lord God remember in his kingdom, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
Our president (or appropriate head of state), civil authorities and armed forces, the Lord God remember in his kingdom, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
The servants of God, NN., that they may have mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, visitation, pardon and remission of sins, the Lord God remember in his kingdom, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
The servants of God departed this life in the hope of the resurrection and life eternal, NN., the Lord God remember in his kingdom, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
{{NAMES}}
DEACON: Do good, master.

THE LITANY OF SUPPLICATION
DEACON: Let us complete our prayer unto the Lord.
The choir responds Lord, have mercy to each petition until noted.
For the precious gifts now set forth, let us pray to the Lord.
For this holy house and those who with faith, reverence and fear of God enter therein, let us pray to the Lord.
For our deliverance from all tribulation, wrath, danger and necessity, let us pray to the Lord.
Help us; save us; have mercy on us; and keep us, O God, by thy grace.
That the whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let us ask of the Lord.
The choir responds Grant this, O Lord to this and the following petitions.
An angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies, let us ask of the Lord.
Pardon and remission of our sins and transgressions, let us ask of the Lord.
All things good and profitable for our souls and peace for the world, let us ask of the Lord.
That we may complete the remaining time of our life in peace and repentance, let us ask of the Lord.
A Christian ending to our life, painless, blameless, peaceful, and a good defense before the fearful judgment seat of Christ, let us ask.
Calling to remembrance our all-holy, immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary, with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and each other and all our life unto Christ our God.
CHOIR: To thee, O Lord.
The priest says the prayer of the proskomedia quietly; only the concluding exclamation is said aloud.
PRIEST: Through the compassions of thine only-begotten Son, with whom thou art blessed, together with thine all-holy and good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.
PRIEST: Peace be to all.
CHOIR: And to thy spirit.
DEACON: Let us love one another, that with one accord we may confess:
CHOIR: Father, Son and Holy Spirit: the Trinity, one in essence and undivided.
PRIEST: I will love thee, O Lord, my Strength; the Lord is my firm Foundation, my Refuge and my Deliverer.
DEACON: The doors. The doors. In wisdom, let us attend.

THE SYMBOL OF FAITH (THE CREED)
ALL: I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth and of all things visible and invisible,
And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the only-begotten, begotten of the Father before all worlds,
Light of Light, Very God of Very God, begotten, not made, of one essence with the Father, by whom all things were made,
Who for us men and for our salvation came down from heaven and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary and became man
And was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate and suffered and was buried, and the third day He rose again, according to the Scriptures,
And ascended into heaven and sitteth at the right hand of the Father;
And he shall come again with glory to judge the living and the dead, whose kingdom shall have no end.
And I believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceedeth from the Father,
Who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified, who spake by the prophets;
And I believe in one holy catholic and apostolic Church.
I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of sins.
I look for the resurrection of the dead and the life of the world to come. Amen.

THE HOLY ANAPHORA
DEACON: Let us stand aright. Let us stand with fear. Let us attend that we may offer the holy oblation in peace.
CHOIR: A mercy of peace, a sacrifice of praise.
PRIEST: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God the Father and the communion of the Holy Spirit be with you all.
CHOIR: And with thy spirit.
PRIEST: Let us lift up our hearts.
CHOIR: We lift them up unto the Lord.
PRIEST: Let us give thanks unto the Lord.
CHOIR: It is meet and right.
The priest continues the prayer of the anaphora quietly; only the concluding exclamations below are said aloud.
PRIEST: Singing the triumphal hymn, shouting, proclaiming and saying:
CHOIR: Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord of Sabaoth, heaven and earth are full of thy glory. Hosanna in the highest. Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest.
PRIEST: Take, eat. This is my Body which is broken for you, for the remission of sins.
CHOIR: Amen.
PRIEST: Drink of this, all of you. This is my Blood of the new covenant, which is shed for you and for many, for the remission of sins.
CHOIR: Amen.
PRIEST: Thine own of thine own we offer unto thee, in behalf of all and for all.
CHOIR: We hymn thee, we bless thee, we give thanks unto thee, O Lord, and we pray unto thee, O our God.

THE EPICLESIS
DEACON: Bless, master, the holy bread.
PRIEST: And make this bread the precious Body of thy Christ,
DEACON: Amen.
DEACON: Bless, master, the holy cup.
PRIEST: And that which is in this cup, the precious Blood of thy Christ,
DEACON: Amen.
DEACON: Bless both, master.
PRIEST: Changing them by thy Holy Spirit,
DEACON: Amen. Amen. Amen. Remember me a sinner, holy master.
The priest continues quietly, commemorating the saints and the whole Church.
PRIEST: Especially our all-holy, immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary;
CHOIR: It is truly meet to bless thee, O Theotokos, who art ever blessed and all-blameless and the Mother of our God. More honorable than the cherubim and more glorious beyond compare than the seraphim, thou who without corruption didst bear God the Word and art truly Theotokos: we magnify thee.
{{MEGALYNARION}}
PRIEST: The holy Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist John; the holy, glorious and all-laudable apostles;
{{SAINT_OF_DAY}}
and all thy saints, at whose supplications visit us, O God.
PRIEST: Among the first be mindful, O Lord, of our father and metropolitan, N., (and our bishop, N.,) whom do thou grant unto thy holy churches in peace, safety, honor, health and length of days and rightly dividing the word of thy truth.
DEACON: And of the people here present, of those whom they are remembering and of all mankind.
CHOIR: And of all mankind.
And grant us with one mouth and one heart to glorify and praise thine all-honorable and majestic name, of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.
PRIEST: And may the mercies of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ be with you all.
CHOIR: And with thy spirit.

THE LITANY BEFORE THE OUR FATHER
DEACON: Having commemorated all the saints, again and again, in peace let us pray to the Lord.
The choir responds Lord, have mercy to each petition.
For the precious gifts which have been spread forth and sanctified, let us pray to the Lord.
That our God, who loveth mankind, having received them upon his holy, most heavenly and ideal altar as an aroma of spiritual sweetness, will send down upon us in return his divine grace and the gift of the Holy Spirit, let us pray.
Asking for the unity of the faith and the communion of the Holy Spirit, let us commend ourselves and each other and all our life unto Christ our God.
CHOIR: To thee, O Lord.
PRIEST: Unto thee we commend our whole life and our hope, O Master who lovest mankind, and we beseech thee and pray thee and supplicate thee: Vouchsafe us to partake of thy heavenly and dread mysteries of this sacred and spiritual table with a pure conscience, unto remission of sins, unto pardon of transgressions, unto communion of the Holy Spirit, unto inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, unto boldness toward thee, and not unto judgment nor unto condemnation.
And vouchsafe, O Master, that with boldness and without condemnation we may dare to call upon thee, the heavenly God, as Father and to say:

THE OUR FATHER
ALL: Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.
PRIEST: For thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory, of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.
PRIEST: Peace be to all.
CHOIR: And to thy spirit.
DEACON: Bow your heads unto the Lord.
CHOIR: To thee, O Lord.
The priest reads the prayer of inclination quietly; only the concluding exclamation is said aloud.
PRIEST: Through the grace and compassions and love toward mankind of thine only-begotten Son, with whom thou art blessed, together with thine all-holy and good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.

THE ELEVATION AND FRACTION
DEACON: Let us attend.
PRIEST: The Holy Things are for the holy.
CHOIR: One is holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen.
DEACON: Divide, master, the holy bread.
PRIEST: Divided and distributed is the Lamb of God, who is divided yet not disunited, who is ever eaten yet never consumed but sanctifieth those who partake thereof.
DEACON: Fill, master, the holy cup.
PRIEST: The fullness of the Holy Spirit.
DEACON: Amen.
DEACON: Bless, master, the zeon.
PRIEST: Blessed is the warmth of thy holy things, O Lord, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
DEACON: Amen.
DEACON: The warmth of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

THE PRE-COMMUNION PRAYERS
ALL: I believe, O Lord, and I confess that thou art truly the Christ, the Son of the living God, who didst come into the world to save sinners, of whom I am first. And I believe that this is truly thine own immaculate Body and that this is truly thine own precious Blood. Wherefore, I pray thee, have mercy upon me, and pardon my transgressions both voluntary and involuntary, of word and of deed, of knowledge and of ignorance; and make me worthy to partake without condemnation of thine immaculate mysteries unto remission of sins and unto life everlasting. Amen.
Of thy mystic supper, O Son of God, accept me today as a communicant; for I will not speak of thy mystery to thine enemies, neither will I give thee a kiss as did Judas, but like the thief will I confess thee: Remember me, O Lord, in thy kingdom.
Not unto judgment nor unto condemnation be my partaking of thy holy mysteries, O Lord, but unto the healing of soul and body.
CHOIR: Praise the Lord from the heavens. Praise him in the highest. Alleluia.
{{COMMUNION_HYMN}}

THE COMMUNION
DEACON: With fear of God and faith and love, draw near.
CHOIR: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. God is the Lord and hath appeared unto us.
The priest communes those who are prepared to receive the holy mysteries. The faithful remain standing out of reverence for the Body and Blood of Christ.
PRIEST: O God, save thy people and bless thine inheritance.
CHOIR: We have seen the true Light; we have received the heavenly Spirit; We have found the true Faith, worshipping the undivided Trinity; for He hath saved us.
{{TRUE_LIGHT_REPLACEMENT}}
DEACON: Exalt, master.
PRIEST: Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory, above all the earth.
PRIEST: Always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen. Let our mouths be filled with thy praise, O Lord, that we may sing of thy glory; for thou hast permitted us to partake of thy holy, divine, immortal and life-giving mysteries. Establish us in thy sanctification that all the day long we may meditate upon thy righteousness. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.

LITANY OF THANKSGIVING
DEACON: Stand upright. Having partaken of the divine, holy, immaculate, immortal, heavenly, life-giving and dread mysteries of Christ, let us worthily give thanks unto the Lord.
The choir responds Lord, have mercy to each petition.
Help us; save us; have mercy on us; and keep us, O God, by thy grace.
Asking that the whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let us commend ourselves and each other and all our life unto Christ our God.
CHOIR: To thee, O Lord.
PRIEST: We give thanks unto thee, O Master who lovest mankind, Benefactor of our souls, for that thou hast vouchsafed this day to feed us with thy heavenly and immortal mysteries. Make straight our path; establish us all in thy fear; guard our steps, through the prayers of the glorious Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary and of all thy saints.
PRIEST: For thou art our Sanctification, and unto thee we ascribe glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.
PRIEST: Let us go forth in peace.
CHOIR: In the name of the Lord.
DEACON: Let us pray to the Lord.
CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.

THE PRAYER BEHIND THE AMVON
PRIEST: O Lord, who blessest those who bless thee and sanctifiest those who put their trust in thee: Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance, preserve the fullness of thy Church, sanctify those who love the beauty of thy house, glorify them in recompense by thy divine power, and forsake us not who hope on thee. Give peace to thy world, to thy churches, to the priests, to the civil authorities, to the armed forces and to all thy people; for all good giving and every perfect gift is from above and cometh down from thee, the Father of lights, and unto thee we ascribe glory, thanksgiving and worship, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.
Blessed be the name of the Lord henceforth and forevermore. (thrice)
PRIEST: O Christ our God, who art thyself the Fulfillment of the Law and the Prophets, who didst fulfill all the dispensation of the Father: Fill our hearts with joy and gladness, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.
DEACON: Let us pray to the Lord.
CHOIR: Lord, have mercy.
PRIEST: The blessing of the Lord and his mercy come upon you, through his divine grace and love toward mankind, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages.
CHOIR: Amen.
PRIEST: Glory to thee, O Christ our God and our Hope, glory to thee.
CHOIR: Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen. Lord, have mercy. (thrice) Father, bless.

THE DISMISSAL
{{DISMISSAL}}
PRIEST: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us.
CHOIR: Amen.
